
# TtDT - Report - A resilient approach


The bCLEARer approach[ is architected to]{.inline-comment-marker
ref="255f638b-abdc-473d-81f7-a739989dbbcc"} uncover opportunities for
digital evolution and to rapidly exploit them. The initial stages of the
approach are ones of discovery, where the process evolves to meet the
emerging requirements and so usually involves radical change.

Given the need to support rapid evolutionary change, including radical
change, the bCLEARer approach needs to be resilient, to thrive rather
than collapse when faced with change. Any [resilient
system]{.inline-comment-marker
ref="658c2606-7a53-4c3b-bda6-4ff514c4a663"} must strike a[
]{style="color: rgb(255,86,48);"}good balance between stability and
flexibility. The bCLEARer approach has evolved to be resilient -- to
facilitate radical change.

The aim of this report is to provide a foundation for the resilient
inspection practices that have emerged in the bCLEARer approach over the
last three decades. These exploit ways of identifying, tracking, tracing
and testing what information there is and how it is transformed.
Adopting these core practices helps to build trust in the bCLEARer
digital transformations.

[]{#Bookmark4}

# Right balance of principles and rules {#Bookmark4}

Any resilient system must strike a[
]{style="color: rgb(255,86,48);"}good balance between stability and
flexibility. It must have stable elements that persist through change
and flexible elements that can adapt to changes. From an ecosystem
perspective, the stable infrastructure can be regarded as the
environment in which the transformations unfold and evolve.

This good balance of stability and flexibility [is
]{.inline-comment-marker
ref="d3cdc3db-98e0-4092-8be0-9f71565cced4"}needs to be reflected in
framing the approach within the [right balance of principles and
rules]{.inline-comment-marker
ref="5b6b1c77-0d3d-43de-9ec4-ea78b58698be"} -- particularly algorithmic
rules -, see
[https://borocvi.atlassian.net/l/cp/kSZJbnMy](https://borocvi.atlassian.net/l/cp/kSZJbnMy "https://borocvi.atlassian.net/l/cp/kSZJbnMy"){.external-link
card-appearance="inline" rel="nofollow"}. Where principles describe the
broad aims and trust in the commitment of those executing them, whereas
rules specify narrow, potentially rigid, constraints upon what can and
cannot be done.

[]{#Bookmark5}

## Rules {#Bookmark5}

Rules aim to provide a structure that is, in theory, sufficient for
resolving a particular type of case. They might seem to provide
certainty and a clear standard of behaviour. They might seem to be
easier to apply consistently. But it is difficult for rules to be
congruent with their purpose, to achieve what it is they are intended to
achieve. Rules are based upon a "best guess" as to the future. The
rulemaker has to anticipate how the rule will be applied in the future.
But new situations may arise that were not expected or known about when
the rule was written. The rule may be interpreted and applied in ways
that were not intended or anticipated by the writer. In practice, this
not only leads to gaps, inconsistencies, rigidity, but is prone to
degeneration into "creative compliance" (where the letter is followed
but not the spirit). This creates a need for constant adjustment to new
situations. This can then then lead to a '[ratchet
syndrome]{.inline-comment-marker
ref="45bb6a5e-299d-47b0-b03f-f3ad5e70d4b4"}', where more rules are
created to address new problems or close new gaps, creating more gaps
and so on.

[]{#Bookmark6}

## Principles {#Bookmark6}

Principles are typically more general and focus on purpose rather than
process. This makes them more flexible without sacrificing congruence
with their purpose. The execution of both rules and principles rely upon
being understood, a shared understanding in the case of teams. However,
in the case of principles there is typically a need for a wider and
deeper understanding to interpret the principles in the way intended, or
even suitably extend the interpretation to novel situations.

[]{#Bookmark7}

## [Principles and rules]{.inline-comment-marker ref="2df1beda-95e2-48f2-89ad-e498e2843bdc"} {#Bookmark7}

Given the variety of situations in which bCLEARer is deployed and the
requirement for rapid evolution and the associated radical change, rules
by themselves are not the right tool for the job. Principles have a
better initial fit for the bCLEARer situation. So there is no choice but
to start with a principle-based approach. However, the requirement for a
repeatable, scalable process means that in the end, the bCLEARer process
needs to be developed as largely (computer-)executable rules.

The aim of this report is to describe the principles that underlie the
bCLEARer approach to resilient transparency as well as start to develop
some understanding of the kinds of executable rules that should be
developed.

[]{#Bookmark8}

# Report structure {#Bookmark8}

The approach is outlined in the body of the report, in two main
sections:

-   A resilient, transparent bCLEARer pipeline architecture

-   Building resilient transformation transparency into the bCLEARer
    pipeline

The first section focuses on the pipeline architecture of the overall
approach. This is the infrastructure that provides the stability that
any resilient system requires to remain flexible in the face of change.

The second section describes how transformation transparency is built
into the bCLEARer pipelines based upon notions of identity. It focuses
on how to build in transparency from the bottom up. Then how to exploit
this to identify, track, trace and test what information there is and
how it is transformed.
