
# TtDT - Report - A resilient, transparent bCLEARer pipeline architecture


[To help ensure resilience, i][[t is important that the
architecture of the system strike the right balance between stability
and flexibility - and provide the stability within which the system can
flex.] In the case of the bCLEARer
approach, it is the stable element that persists through change
providing the infrastructure in which the transformations unfold and
evolve.

The bCLEARer approach's architecture also needs to encourage successful
evolution. In particular, it needs to be transparent, actively
encouraging the inspection of the evolutionary transformations along the
digital journey. The architecture described here has evolved over time
in response to the requirement for a stable infrastructure that supports
the rapid, transparent evolution of the pipeline.

There are three core aspects that characterise the bCLEARer
architecture:

-   firstly, the overall 'pipeline' or 'pipe and filter' architecture
    (additional material in the appendix:
    [https://borocvi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SB/pages/5773197350/Appendix+-+Pipe+and+Filter+Architecture](https://borocvi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SB/pages/5773197350/Appendix+-+Pipe+and+Filter+Architecture "https://borocvi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SB/pages/5773197350/Appendix+-+Pipe+and+Filter+Architecture"){card-appearance="inline"
    rel="nofollow"}).

-   secondly, the bCLEARer gated nesting structure of the pipes and
    filters.

-   thirdly, the three broad nesting levels.

Then there is the general approach to developing the design within the
architecture.

These are described in the following sections.


# Sub-Pages

-   [TtDT - Report - bCLEARer\'s pipeline or pipe-and-filter
    architecture](../page5773230168#Bookmark11 "TtDT - Report - bCLEARer's pipeline or pipe-and-filter architecture"){linked-resource-id="5773230168"
    linked-resource-version="91" linked-resource-type="page"}
-   [TtDT - Report - bCLEARer\'s nested gated pipeline
    architecture](../page5773656071#Bookmark28 "TtDT - Report - bCLEARer's nested gated pipeline architecture"){linked-resource-id="5773656071"
    linked-resource-version="76" linked-resource-type="page"}
-   [TtDT - Report - bCLEARer pipeline\'s three nesting
    levels](../page5766545422#Bookmark36 "TtDT - Report - bCLEARer pipeline's three nesting levels"){linked-resource-id="5766545422"
    linked-resource-version="80" linked-resource-type="page"}
-   [TtDT - Report - bCLEARer pipeline - general
    design](../page5775163422#Bookmark44 "TtDT - Report - bCLEARer pipeline - general design"){linked-resource-id="5775163422"
    linked-resource-version="41" linked-resource-type="page"}
