
# TtDT - Report - Introduction
The bCLEARer framework facilitates taking information on a digital
journey, curating its digital evolution into forms more suited for
computing. This journey involves a series of transformations that both:

-   salvage the information in existing artefacts -- transforming the
    way in which it is stored -- making it more accessible, more
    computer readable and more amenable to later transformations
    ([digitisation]), and

-   transform the information, evolving and improving it
    ([digitalisation]).

In any evolutionary process, there needs to be a selection of the
[adaptions ](in this case,
transformations) that are fitter. In the controlled evolution in the
bCLEARer environment, selection is reinforced by inspection which relies
upon the transformations being visible for inspection. If the
transformations are transparent, this enables one to both easily see
where they go wrong and fix them -- and see where they go right and
engender trust in them.

Hence the bCLEARer framework has over time developed ways of making the
transformations transparent; ways of identifying, tracking, tracing and
testing what information there is and how it is transformed. This report
provides an overview of the foundation for these. Its aim is to [outline
core practices that, when adopted, help build trust in the bCLEARer
digital transformations].

These core practices are outlined in the body of the report. Further
details, including more technical matter and reference material is
relegated to Appendices. This includes a [glossary of the main terms
]([TtDT - Report - Appendix -
Glossary of Major
Terms](../page5780340771 "TtDT - Report - Appendix - Glossary of Major Terms")) and a
reference iconography ([TtDT - Report - Appendix - Reference
Iconography](../page5784010894 "TtDT - Report - Appendix - Reference Iconography")).
